webTitle: Defence spending: no, prime minister | Editorial
sectionName: Opinion
headline: Defence spending: no, prime minister
trailText: It is to Cameron's credit that he is not a control freak, but nothing a prime minister says or does is without political consequence
webPublicationDate: 2013-01-31T23:15:57Z
bodytext: The recent return of Yes, Prime Minister to the television screen has been greeted with disappointingly lukewarm reviews. Now, perhaps sensing a gap in the Whitehall comedy show market, the real prime minister did his best to make amends by triggering a political kerfuffle in the best traditions of Jim Hacker. Talking to journalists on his way to Algiers on Wednesday, David Cameron dropped a heavy hint that the defence budget would be protected from further cuts in this year's mini spending review covering the year 2015-16. The travelling press duly reported his remarks, with some treating them as a promise to increase defence spending above inflation for the rest of the current decade. On arrival in Algiers, Downing Street officials appeared to stand the story up still more firmly, saying that Mr Cameron would honour his earlier pledge to increase defence spending from 2015. Others stretched the story even further, implying that the promised extra spending would help ensure that Britain could engage against Islamic terrorists in north Africa, as unnamed service chiefs were allegedly urging on Mr Cameron. Commentators inevitably began to speculate on the spending implications for other ministers, suddenly facing fresh departmental budget cuts in order to pay for the PM's apparent largesse towards the Ministry of Defence. Everything appeared to reinforce the narrative that Mr Cameron, the light of battle in his eyes and anxious to offer real commitments to regional regimes, was prepared to cut further at home in order to boost the fight against terrorism in the desert. There was, however, a problem. The narrative was wrong. UK defence spending in Mali and north Africa is not so great that it requires a rewriting of the defence budget either now or in the foreseeable future. The money is there already. More embarrassingly, Mr Cameron was wrong to hint that current cuts in defence spending would be put into reverse from 2015. That is not his government's policy. Officials scrambled to get their new story straight. The defence budget would not, after all, be protected from cuts in the 2015-16 review, they announced. Further cuts to the military remained a real possibility. A pre-existing commitment that the defence equipment budget will rise by 1% in real terms from 2016 to 2020 stays. For the rest, though, it was a clear case of No, Prime Minister. This is not, however, an episode in a comedy series but an episode in real live politics. Naturally, Mr Cameron is entitled to be cut a bit of slack to make an occasional mistake. The demands on party leaders to know everything about everything are absurd. It is a tribute to all modern PMs that they manage to keep abreast of as much as they do. And it is to Mr Cameron's credit that he is not, unlike some of his predecessors, a political control freak. Nevertheless, nothing a prime minister says or does is without political consequence. The clear inference from the hastily revised Downing Street version is that the non-equipment part of the defence budget – which is mostly made up of people – could face another round of cuts, not just in 2015 but in the years that follow. Smart observers will also note that the clarified version of the policy allows George Osborne to cut defence back to a significantly lower baseline in 2015-16 so that the 1% rises in equipment spending make less demand on the Treasury in subsequent years. All prime ministers go off-piste sometimes. Tony Blair famously did so deliberately on health spending, with major consequences. Mr Cameron's piece of freelance, by contrast, may be soon forgotten by the public, though not by the newspapers that have been beating the drum for higher defence spending at the expense, in particular, of the aid budget. Yet it was an episode that illustrates a political reality. Today, spending more in one department means spending less in others. Every party faces choices of this kind as their general election offers begin to take shape. Mr Cameron's confusion this week was another sign that his instincts are too often the wrong ones.
webTitle: Transfer deadline day: January 2013 – as it happened
